with all of this said however during the  month it's taken to produce this video i  further reduce my dairy and egg  consumption and if the world keeps going  the way it's going i'll probably be  vegan within the year but it won't be  because i buy the ethical vegan argument  it won't be because our circle of  altruism should extend to all sentient  beings no it will simply be either one  because my circle of altruism will  extend to all sentient beings courtesy  of socioeconomic and environmental  privileges or two because my tribe  circle will extend to all sentient  beings and because my well-being is  tethered to my tribe and because my  well-being is tethered to my tribe i'll  sing their song  stephen woodford  what has he done with his life  between age 25  and 31  what exactly has he become  learned in  what is it exactly that he has  experienced with  a lot of people are cursed  rather than blessed  by commercial success  early in life  i've said this to personal friends many  times and i've never said it  on youtube before but talent  is a trap  i knew young people in high school  who were cursed with being just a little  bit too good at a sport and as a result  they never got good at anything else i  knew young women who were just a little  bit too beautiful too early in life and  they got a career something like  modeling you know  one path or another was made a little  bit too easy and then they never  developed in those other ways and these  are people i knew well enough to see  that they had a spark of intellectual  potential they had the raw intelligence  necessary to basically do anything they  wanted to do with their lives but they  didn't do any of those things instead  they did what was made  easy for them  by a society that in a sense  preys upon  their talents if you can really throw a  basketball  you know if you can really hit a  baseball  or if you can  walk down a runway  sell  a borrow soap  sell a designer dress right  talent  is a trap and it's very  easy from the outside  to feel a sense of yearning that you  wish you were one of those people  for whom success  was easy but what's best  for all mankind  is instead to struggle  to distinguish yourself from the  masses  that you are  without intellectual accomplishment  indistinguishable from  i used to be  a scholar of buddhism  and i'm not anymore i  i often kind of joke and say it's just  not a part of my life in any way  right but it certainly was part of the  sharpening of my mind that i applied to  talking about philosophy on youtube  today talking about politics critique of  religion critique of atheism buddhist  ethics so on and so forth i became a  scholar of something  years of incredibly hard work just a  huge amount of reading research learning  languages and including you know the the  the most casual form of archaeology but  which i mean just going out and visiting  archaeological sites that other people  had dug up just doing  tourism if you like  before i was going and looking at stone  inscriptions and all these things right  i'm no hero  it's nothing extraordinary but it  certainly is an extraordinary contrast  to  someone like stephen  someone like cosmic skeptic someone like  ask yourself someone who at a very early  age  got  money and fame and respect on the  internet and then disappeared  into a narrow little oobly yet  on discord  these guys are all video game addicts  who just listen to a chorus of  like-minded opinion and even when people  debate with them even when people  disagree with them even when people  challenge them they don't realize the  extent to which those people disagreeing  with them really are only disagreeing  within this very narrow category of the  type of video game addicted loser who  would be on discord  talk to them that way in the first place  utilitarianism  at the great universities of europe  today in the 21st century  all right  is utilitarianism an important  philosophy  anywhere  at the great universities  of china  of india  of japan  are these considered really important  philosophical texts  is there now  anywhere in the world  a political party  for whom jeremy bentham  is a major and important philosopher or  theorist you know even within  the tiny demi monde of vegan philosophy  of vegan politics who gives a [ __ ] about  utilitarianism who cares about who looks  up to the philosophy of jeremy bentham a  tiny number  of video game addicted losers within  discord precisely  people like steven here rationality  rules people like cosmic skeptic people  like ask yourself  the type of people  who look up to and admire sam harris  right  and who disregard what sam harris's  religious philosophy  actually is something i have made  youtube videos about  in the past  stephen  has no pretense of being well read  in vegan theory in vegan politics  in vegan philosophy he does not present  himself  as someone who has read gary francione  now who else is there  to have read if we're being honest i  mean if we're going to make a list of  heavy hitters in in vegan politics and  vegan philosophy the top five list it  includes gary francione and me and there  aren't a whole lot of other names  to put in the list  bokeh we can make a full list and  include some names like casey taft you  could do the full reno's you could get a  sense of  the variety of theories that are  contending uh you know the citizenship  approach the abolitionist approach you  know so on and so forth could get into  the founder of peta and her  philosophical views and so on and so on  here is stephen referring to the  ethical argument for veganism the  philosophy of veganism the politics of  veganism as if there is only one  and what he's addressing is this frankly  very unpopular and  fatuous and pointless theory derived  from an internet nerds reading of  utilitarianism that nobody outside of  their narrow little subculture on the  internet cares about and nobody has ever  cared about right veganism it's big  money there are multi-million dollar  foundations  in this game if you think these are the  important theoretical and philosophical  arguments in veganism why don't they  matter to peta multi-million dollar  organization why don't they matter to  dxe  direct action everywhere i've done  lengthy in-depth critiques of the  political philosophy of dxe originally  written and published by wayne syong  i've read their material again stephen  hasn't he doesn't know about this stuff  he doesn't know about the debate going  on within veganism over the last five  years or less ten years the things  he has been debating and pontificating  on here right  they're neither true nor false they're  frankly irrelevant  to the political and philosophical  discourse within veganism and the  saddest thing of all is he doesn't even  know that  yet  i said many times when i first started  this channel  there were going to be no footnotes and  there are going to be none of the  niceties and conventions of academic  writing i was already very familiar with  academic writing and very frustrated  with it  one of the biggest taboos in academic  writing is to offer ad hominem arguments  is to ask the question who is this guy  what has he done with his life  between age 25 and age  31 aside from sitting on his ass on the  internet and as they say  fairly effortlessly becoming  famous do you think stephen is well read  do you think he has a wealth of real  world experience of of research of  activism of being involved in any kind  of political or historical struggle did  he go to syria  did he go to iraq i mean it can't be  cambodia for everyone has he gone  anywhere and done anything how about  rachel oates  how about any of the colleagues he's  come up with  in this way or is it fair to say that  they are  as the old idiom goes hothouse flowers  who've really been living their lives  under glass  in circumstances where some people  have to struggle some people have to  work very hard  to achieve the level of fame they've  achieved but some don't  some people like stephen and rachel  oates  pretty much have that fame handed to  them effortlessly and  to be fair  there is some kind  of talent  involved here  but as i cautioned before talent is a  trap it becomes tremendously corrupting  for people of all ages  because they stop challenging themselves  they stop learning they stop really  developing through what i call  active research  what stephen is presenting us with  is not an informed opinion  it's important to include the ad hominem  component here and it doesn't mean being  cruel or being catty it's important to  reflect on our own personal experiences  our own personal biases even if that's  just what we have read and what we  haven't read in life  talking about other people what are  their opinions based on what are their  conclusions based on and it may come out  of ignorance or it may come out of some  very specific experience in life that  shapes the way they think about these  topics what their conclusions and  recommendations are but to say this is  who i am  this is what i know this is what i care  about and therefore this is my  philosophy this is my political practice  whatever it may be  long story short my response to stephen  is this  you are making the error  of disregarding the positive difference  you can make in the world  by focusing needlessly on the difference  you  cannot  there are creatures like gophers there  are creatures that burrow in the ground  that are killed by  vegan forms of agriculture there are  creatures like rabbits there are  creatures like rats and there are  innumerable forms of insects  that are killed by vegan farming both  actually and you could say  hypothetically like if you're thinking  about a future civilization a  hypothetical science fiction  civilization where 100 of people are  vegan there's still going to be some  rats  some moles some gophers some growing  animals some insects that are killed for  our production of food but if you think  of that  as the difference you cannot make  why would that in any way  diminish the significance of the  difference you  can  now stephen i think the reason why  you're so  mind-blowingly stupid about this is your  lack of hands-on  real world experience  if you go to cambodia  and you want to work in education you  want to help one of the most backward  ignorant post-communist post-war  disasters of a country have higher and  higher  levels of education you might go there  with the stated mission of saying you're  gonna you're gonna educate the poor  you're gonna educate the poor and  disadvantaged and bad  and you get there and you set up the  school and you have a really good school  you have a really excellent school  and guess what the richest and most  powerful people in the country they want  their kids to go to your school and  they're going to make it happen and now  you find yourself struggling just to  reserve 10  of the seats in your school for the poor  and disadvantaged because you've ended  up helping the people who need the help  the least you've ended up helping the  economic elite and the political elite  give their kids  a better education right so you're one  man and let's say you have 10 employees  you have a small school you're one man  with  nine other teachers plus one secretary  that's the school  you know and you know you can become  overwrought with the thought of the  difference you can't make you can become  consumed by the awareness that there are  illiterate rice farmers in the  countryside and you are not reaching  them you are not helping there are  people when i was there still some  people in conditions like refugee camps  displaced people we'll say uh not  necessarily refugee camps foreign but  anyway different times there are people  living in these  you know terrible conditions we still  had tribal people living in the  mountains and frankly tribal conditions  in world two you know  okay  do you want to become  consumed by  the awareness  of the difference you cannot make or do  you want to focus  positively and pragmatically on the  difference you can  that the situation is  you can help  some people  oh you can educate  some  people or yes you can throw up your  hands and offer some kind of bizarre  utilitarian rationale about how this is  not strictly logically consistent and  that therefore  you're going to help  nobody at all now that world  that demi monde of humanitarian work  it brings you into a lot of moral  compromises you thought you'd never make  so let's say you're running this small  school and again  maybe you've reserved 10 of the seats  for for orphans frankly but for poor and  disadvantaged people and your original  plan was for 100 of the seats to  disadvantage people but it didn't didn't  work out that way  you were out there doing this what kind  of people are you going to employ  who are your colleagues going to be who  are you going to work with  i'm an atheist i'm a nihilistic  atheist  probably the only employees you can get  and probably the best employees you can  get  will be christian fundamentalists  they will be pious christians who want  to help the disadvantaged and the poor  people who are committed to a life of  sobriety and self-discipline coming out  of a spiritual background of some kind  if you're lucky maybe you can find some  buddhist fanatics maybe you can find  some hindu finex maybe you've got to  work with muslims  i met people doing charity to help uh  people in cambodia and laos and that  out of a muslim  uh cultural background right  but if you think you're gonna be able to  work with  the type of  hippie who is doing ecstasy and meth at  the full moon party in co-pp or  kopanyang or whatever like the the type  of tattooed  hippie bon vivo atheist  who goes to cambodia town those are the  people who are going to buckle down and  do the excruciating work of learning the  language who are going to live in really  tough conditions a life of frankly worse  than monastic self-sacrifice because you  can have a very comfortable life as a  monk whether it's a christian monk or a  buddhist one  um  the people with those qualities and  those characteristics it's going to be a  real challenge to your atheism when you  look around and find that you've now  surrounded yourself with people who  ideologically and philosophically really  disagree with you when you have problems  running your school like maybe there's a  corrupt government official who's trying  to extort money from you maybe a corrupt  police officer maybe you're just having  problems doing the paperwork that you  need to keep your operation running who  do you turn to  who do you talk to over time  you may find yourself being drawn into a  web of intrigue at the  american embassy at the australian  embassy  where you are in fact informing the cia  or people who are proxies for the cia  working for shadowy agencies like the  u.s state department it's remarkable how  many businessmen including small  businessmen are connected to what we  might call the intelligence community in  places like cambodian laos and where  every so often the intelligence  community or someone who has a seemingly  respectable job at the embassy actually  asks you  for a favor ask you to talk to somebody  ask you to tell them something ask you  to go and have a look around asks you to  give someone a guided tour ask you to  provide a cover story for someone you  might find  that there is somebody who is  overtly or covertly a cia operative and  someone whether it's from the australian  embassy or the american embassy they ask  you to do the paperwork to make it  appear that this person is a teacher at  your school  but they're not  really going to teach they're going to  be out somewhere else doing something  and they may tell you that this person  is an agricultural engineer  going out to work in the rice industry  that was the old that's that's real  1970s 1980s cover story that was the old  style  there would be a suspiciously large  number of uh of you know agricultural  experts working to improve the quality  of rice in cambodia and laos you may  find yourself  making  moral compromises just to keep that  little school going  and just to provide that education and  opportunity to a small number of people  where you won't be helping  the poor and disadvantaged  rise up in society you will be helping  the elite become even more elite you  will be helping to exacerbate  inequality  to make people more unequal  not less  this is the kind of perspective  of the harm  that must be done  in the pursuit of doing good  that you only get  from real world experience neither from  the reading of books  [Music]  nor from the playing of video games and  sharpening your claws through these  kinds of very artificial internet  debates whether that be on discord or  on youtube or whatever the latest  streaming platform is whatever's  whatever is  fashionable these days all right  my conclusion is not to say to you go  out  and be a hypocrite  my point is to say  that  real vegans  are not people who proceed  from a chalkboard equation  of what would be logically consistent  with the utilitarian theories set down  by jeremy bentham  real vegans the people who are changing  the movement now and who will make a  difference in the future are precisely  the ones who understand  whether cerebrally or intuitively and  through experience  they understand that harm must be done  in the pursuit of some good  there are people who understand that if  you want to stand for office  and run for government you cannot  morally object the amount of jet fuel  you're going to burn going from town to  town to give your lectures to make your  make your bid try to get yourself  elected into government you can't say oh  no no i couldn't possibly ruin the  world's atmosphere by taking a whole  bunch of needless flights as part of my  election campaign  and they are going to be the people who  are going to sit down and solicit  donations  from frankly the most evil corporations  in the world  you can be  uncompromising  in the pursuit of the good  and in so doing  you recognize  that you in your way  will also do  tremendous harm  reality does not now fit into and never  has fit into  jeremy bentham's utilitarian formula  life is fundamentally not about  the maximum amount of pleasure  with the minimum  amount of pain  people who change the world are the ones  who are willing to endure  unspeakable sorrow tremendous suffering  and who are even willing to inflict pain  on others  in the pursuit of what they know  to be good